Add Specification for LLM-Assisted Translations (#3071)
mozilla/pontoon: specs/0116-LLM-assisted-translations.md

- Feature Name: LLM-Assisted Translations in Pontoon
- Created: 2024-01-12
- Associated Issue: #3064

# Summary

Introduce LLM-assisted translations in Pontoon to provide alternative, formal, and informal translation options, enhancing the localization process and community health.

# Motivation

In the realm of machine translation, recent studies have highlighted the evolving capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). This feature aims to revitalize community engagement and improve the efficiency of localization in Mozilla's projects. Incorporating LLM-assisted translations keeps Mozilla competitive with other TMS providers, adopting new technology for better community health and more effective translation.

# Feature explanation

> In the Machinery tab of the Pontoon translate view, users will encounter a new dropdown option for each 100% translation memory match for a given string, offering three choices: 

Reviewer: Is it "each 100% translation memory match" or "each machine translation suggestion" or both?

Author: Each machine translation suggestion

- Feature Name: LLM-Assisted Translations in Pontoon
- Created: 2024-01-12
- Associated Issue: #3064

# Summary

> Introduce LLM-assisted translations in Pontoon to provide alternative, formal, and informal translation options, enhancing translation quality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduce LLM-assisted translations in Pontoon to provide alternative translations, including formal and informal options, with the goal to enhance translation quality.
```

# Motivation

> Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) — like OpenAI’s GPT-4 — have reached a quality level for localization tasks that is on par with dedicated machine translation engines. This feature is primarily focused on introducing a tool that aims to improve translation quality in Mozilla's projects. By incorporating LLM-assisted translations, Mozilla not only remains competitive with other Translation Management Systems (TMS) providers but also embraces new technology to enhance the overall translation process. This feature also lays the groundwork for future integrations that could further enhance efficiency and broaden the scope of translation improvements within Mozilla's localization efforts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) — like OpenAI’s GPT-4 — have reached a quality level for localization tasks that is on par with dedicated machine translation engines. This feature is primarily focused on introducing a tool that aims to improve translation quality in Mozilla's projects. By incorporating LLM-assisted translations, Mozilla not only remains competitive with other Translation Management Systems (TMS) but also embraces new technologies to enhance the overall translation process. This feature also lays the groundwork for future integrations that could further enhance efficiency and broaden the scope of translation improvements within Mozilla's localization efforts.
```

Reviewer: Why not leave "providers" in? Mozilla is a TMS provider, not TMS.

Reviewer 2: Good point, I didn't think of the subject of the sentence.

# Feature explanation

In the Machinery tab of the Pontoon translate view, users will encounter a new drop-down option for each machine translation suggestion for a given string, offering four choices: 

> 1) `"SHOW ORIGINAL"` - Restore the translation that was initially recommended  by machine translation 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1) `SHOW ORIGINAL` - Restore the translation that was initially recommended by machine translation 
```

Since you're using backticks, I don't think you should keep quotes (they're not actually used in the labels).

Reviewer: Maybe also note that this option is only visible if one of the other options has already been applied. For that reason, I'd put it last.

Author: Makes sense, I added a note on how the `SHOW ORIGINAL` option will only be seen once a new translation is generated.

2) `"MAKE INFORMAL"` - Provide a more informal version of this translation 
3)  `"MAKE FORMAL"` - Provide a more formal version of this translation
4) `"REPHRASE"` - Provide an alternative to this translation 

Upon selecting any of these options, the original machine translation will temporarily show `"AI is writing"` as the LLM generates the new translation. This revised translation will then appear in place of the original suggestion. Users can revert to the original translation by selecting the `"SHOW ORIGINAL"` option from the drop-down menu. 

# Implementation notes

The translation enhancement options will utilize OpenAI’s GPT-4 API to improve the existing machine translation suggestions. This is especially useful for accurately translating challenging phrases, like idiomatic expressions, by utilizing the LLM's capability to adapt translations to the specific style and nuances of the target language.

> Additionally, data on the frequency of LLM usage and the adoption rate of LLM-provided translations will be collected to assess the tool's impact and refine its capabilities.

Reviewer: Yes, assuming there is additional data that needs to be collected. Two things come to my mind:
- Collect additional [Machinery source(s)](https://github.com/mozilla/pontoon/blob/main/pontoon/base/models.py#L3257) (just "LLM" or "MT formal", "MT informal", "MT rephrased").
- [Log UX action](https://github.com/mozilla/pontoon/blob/main/pontoon/uxactionlog/utils.py) for each drop-down entry.

> Additionally, data on the frequency of LLM usage and the adoption rate of LLM-provided translations will be collected to assess the tool's impact and refine its capabilities.

Author: I added these points to the updates spec, thanks.

# Motivation

Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) — like OpenAI’s GPT-4 — have reached a quality level for localization tasks that is on par with dedicated machine translation engines. This feature is primarily focused on introducing a tool that aims to improve translation quality in Mozilla's projects. By incorporating LLM-assisted translations, Mozilla not only remains competitive with other Translation Management Systems (TMS) providers but also embraces new technologies to enhance the overall translation process. This feature also lays the groundwork for future integrations that could further enhance efficiency and broaden the scope of translation improvements within Mozilla's localization efforts.

# Feature explanation

In the Machinery tab of the Pontoon translate view, users will encounter a new drop-down option for each machine translation suggestion for a given string, initially offering three choices: 

1) `MAKE INFORMAL` - Provide a more informal version of this translation 
2) `MAKE FORMAL` - Provide a more formal version of this translation

> 3) `REPHRASE` - Provide an alternative to this translation 

Reviewer 2: Note: I think rephrase should be the first option, because I expect it to be the most common use case. Thoughts?

Reviewer: Makes sense.

Author: Sounds good. I originally structured it this way to make the drop-down options go from longest phrase --> shortest phrase.

Upon selecting any of these options, the original machine translation will temporarily show `AI is writing` as the LLM generates the new translation. This revised translation will then appear in place of the original suggestion. Once a new translation is generated, another option `SHOW ORIGINAL` will be seen in the drop-down menu. Users can revert to the original translation by selecting the `SHOW ORIGINAL` option from the drop-down menu. 

Additionally, after selecting an option from the drop-down menu, the label beside the drop-down arrow will change as follows:
- `MAKE INFORMAL` -> `INFORMAL`
- `MAKE FORMAL` -> `FORMAL`
- `REPHRASE` -> `REPHRASED`
- `SHOW ORIGINAL` -> Reverts to the initial drop-down state

# Implementation notes

The translation enhancement options will utilize OpenAI’s GPT-4 API to improve the existing machine translation suggestions. This is especially useful for accurately translating challenging phrases, like idiomatic expressions, by utilizing the LLM's capability to adapt translations to the specific style and nuances of the target language.

> Additionally, data on the frequency of LLM usage and the adoption rate of LLM-provided translations will be collected to assess the tool's impact and refine its capabilities. This will include identifying additional machinery sources to better understand which aspects of the tool are most utilized. Furthermore, we will log user experience (UX) actions for each selection made in the drop-down menu.

Reviewer 2: > This will include identifying additional machinery sources to better understand which aspects of the tool are most utilized. 

I'm not sure I understand this sentence. Could you provide more context on what you had in mind?

Author: As Matjaz said earlier, we should collect additional Machinery sources, such as "LLM," or more specifically "MT formal," "MT informal," and "MT rephrased," to better understand which aspects of the tool are most utilized.  I'll add this in.

# Motivation

Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) — like OpenAI’s GPT-4 — have reached a quality level for localization tasks that is on par with dedicated machine translation engines. This feature is primarily focused on introducing a tool that aims to improve translation quality in Mozilla's projects. By incorporating LLM-assisted translations, Mozilla not only remains competitive with other Translation Management Systems (TMS) providers but also embraces new technology to enhance the overall translation process. This feature also lays the groundwork for future integrations that could further enhance efficiency and broaden the scope of translation improvements within Mozilla's localization efforts.

# Feature explanation

In the Machinery tab of the Pontoon translate view, users will encounter a new dropdown option for each machine translation suggestion for a given string, offering three choices: 
1) `"Make Informal"` - Provide a more informal version of this translation 
2)  `"Make Formal"` - Provide a more formal version of this translation
3) `"Rephrase"` - Provide an alternative to this translation 

> Upon selecting any of these options, the original machine translation will temporarily show `"AI is writing"` as the LLM generates the new translation. This revised translation will then appear in place of the original suggestion. Users can either accept or reject this new translation. Choosing 'accept' will directly replace the original machine translation with the new one. Each action will be followed by a confirmation pop-up.

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I have added a "Show Original" option to the drop-down menu. So once the user updates the translation using one of the 3 options (Rephrase/Formal/Informal), they can go back by pressing "Show Original".

# Implementation notes

The translation enhancement options will utilize OpenAI’s GPT-4 API to improve the existing machine translation suggestions. This is especially useful for accurately translating challenging phrases, like idiomatic expressions, by utilizing the LLM's capability to adapt translations to the specific style and nuances of the target language.

Additionally, data on the frequency of LLM usage and the adoption rate of LLM-provided translations will be collected to assess the tool's impact and refine its capabilities.

The implementation will be divided into several subtasks:

> 1. API integration to facilitate interaction between Pontoon and the GPT-4 API and logic to utilize translation memory as an input.

Author: Yes, thanks for catching that

2. Implement the ability to provide alternative translation suggestions and to adjust translations for formality.
3. Frontend implementation for the new features.
4. Gather feedback, refine UI/UX, and fix any issues encountered.

# Mockup

![](0116/initial-drop-down.png)

> *Initial drop-down menu*

Reviewer: I worry text in the dropdown will be hard to read. I think it should be the same as in the Machinery sources list (uppercase, 11px).

We could also try to turn "MACHINE TRANSLATION" into a button (with styling similar to the Translation COMMENT button). And then we you AI option would be selected, we'd show REPHRASE / FORMAT / INFORMAL ... in the brackets.

Author: I see how it could be hard to read. I have now turned "GOOGLE TRANSLATE" into a button with a drop-down. One thing that I am not sure of is what the text should change to after each option is selected. For example, if we change the text to "Rephrased" after selecting the "Rephrase" option, how should the other options change in a consistent manner? Right now, I kept the text the same after the selecting each option. Let me know if you have any other ideas or feedback on this.

Reviewer: I'd change the label like this:
"REPHRASE" -> "REPHRASED"
"FORMAL" -> "FORMAL"
"INFORMAL" -> "INFORMAL"
"SHOW ORIGINAL" -> ""

Author: Good idea, thanks!

3) `MAKE INFORMAL` - Provide a more informal version of this translation  

Upon selecting any of these options, the original machine translation will temporarily show `AI is writing` as the LLM generates the new translation. This revised translation will then appear in place of the original suggestion. Once a new translation is generated, another option `SHOW ORIGINAL` will be seen in the drop-down menu. Users can revert to the original translation by selecting the `SHOW ORIGINAL` option from the drop-down menu. 

Additionally, after selecting an option from the drop-down menu, the label beside the drop-down arrow will change as follows:
- `REPHRASE` -> `REPHRASED`
- `MAKE FORMAL` -> `FORMAL`
- `MAKE INFORMAL` -> `INFORMAL`

- `SHOW ORIGINAL` -> Reverts to the initial drop-down state

# Implementation notes

The translation enhancement options will utilize OpenAI’s GPT-4 API to improve the existing machine translation suggestions. This is especially useful for accurately translating challenging phrases, like idiomatic expressions, by utilizing the LLM's capability to adapt translations to the specific style and nuances of the target language.

> Additionally, data on the frequency of LLM usage and the adoption rate of LLM-provided translations will be collected to assess the tool's impact and refine its capabilities. This will include identifying additional Machinery sources, such as "LLM", to better understand if the feature is being utilized. Furthermore, we will log user experience (UX) actions for each selection made in the drop-down menu.

Reviewer 2: Is `storing` better than `identifying`, given your explanation?

Author: Yes, that makes more sense.
